the world-renowned Iranian mathematician
Miriam mizakani has died of cancer in
hospital in the United States she was
the first ever female winner of the very
prestigious Fields medal it's considered
the Nobel Prize for mathematics the
award in 2014 was in recognition of her
work on complex geometry she was 40
years old let's speak to Dr Tom Crawford
a mathematician who's recently finished
his PhD in applied maths he joins us via
webcam from Cambridge thank you very
much for your time her achievements are
absolutely astounding just explain to us
for anybody who doesn't really
understand like myself included complex
geometry dynamical systems that was why
Professor mizakani was given this Nobel
Prize for mathematics what is that
um well first of all just off my
condolences to her family and the
mathematical world because we have
really lost at you know a role model
sort of the first woman to reach the
Pinnacle of mats and what she did was to
to link geometry and Dynamics together
and geometry is sort of the the shapes
and the sizes and the position of
objects sort of around us and Dynamics
relate to forces and the motion these
forces cause and the two are very
interlinked so if you think about our
solar system we have a sun and we have
planets and they're in fixed positions
that's the geometry and then the way the
planets move so the fact that us on
Earth go around the Sun in an ellipse
that's the Dynamics of the system and
what Marion was able to do was to link
these two topics together but not in
something we can visualize like the
solar system she did this in a very
abstract world of sort of curved
mathematical surfaces and to just have
an imagination and to be able to
visualize these things and then to sort
of have all these breakthroughs in that
field it's just incredible it sounds
absolutely extraordinary of course she
is a woman she was a woman in the male
dominated did world how significant is
her achievement
I think as I alluded to before it's the
fields medal is the the mathematical
equivalent of the Nobel Prize and the
fact that it took until 2014 for a woman
to win this it sort of shows just how
difficult it perhaps is for women in
maths and how important and like the
Legacy that mariam's left behind here
because if you think about something
like physics they had Marie Curie won
the the Nobel Prize for physics in 1903
and yet it took almost 110 more years
before a woman was sort of reaching the
top of you know as high as you can get
in the field of maths and she she really
was a just a Trailblazer and just a
fantastic role model for young women who
want to go into science and go into
maths in particular why do you think
it's been so hard for women to do that
then
I think a lot of it is um it seems to be
the the sort of professorship level from
I'm mainly speaking here from experience
so that I think we're improving
um women studying maths at school and
then at University and then going on to
Graduate Studies was sort of getting
better but it's then that next step so
once you sort of complete your PhD enter
to become a lecturer at University or
sort of obtain a professorship sort of a
chair position at a university they tend
to just they've just always seem to go
to to men and I think it's only recently
now we started to see the shift with
more women obtaining these positions and
that is definitely in part to to the
work of Maryam and the fact that she was
able to to obtain you know the top
position the top award you can get as a
mathematician as as a woman and the
first woman to do that absolutely
extraordinary well thank you very much
Dr Tom Crawford and congratulations
because of course you've just recently
finished your PhD in Applied Mathematics
amazing thank you so much for your time